The Project Gutenberg eBook of Inaugural Presidential Address, by Barack
Hussein Obama


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org



Title: Inaugural Presidential Address
       Contributed Transcripts

Author: Barack Hussein Obama


Release Date: January 20, 2009  [eBook #28000]
[Most recently updated: April 29, 2009]

Language: English


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK INAUGURAL PRESIDENTIAL ADDRESS***

Several different version of Barack Hussein Obama's Inaugural
Address, as transcribed.  Please see our eBook #28001 for the
official White House version of the text.


Version 1: As transcribed by a team of Project Gutenberg volunteers

The following 2445 words comprise Barack Hussein Obama's
Inaugural Presidential Address given from noon to 12:15 P.M.,
January 20, 2009.

[Capitals represent emphasis, extra commas represent pauses,
long pauses are represented by ellipses (. . .).]

This was typed by a team of volunteers, as the address was given,
and put through several proofreadings for accuracy.



Barack Obama's Inaugural Address

This is Michael Hart's transcription of President Obama's Inaugural Speech.

It was typed my hand on a new computer, so there may be more errors than
I would have liked if my old one hadn't died last night.

We will be combining this with other versions that will be coming in and
a few references to the official version, but we will stick to what was
said as opposed to the official script.  My paragraphs will not always
be the same length, punctuation not always the same, etc.

Michael S. Hart
Founder
Project Gutenberg

///


My fellow Americans, I stand before you today, humbled by the task before us,
grateful for the trust bestowed, mindful of the sacrifices born by our
ancestors.

I thank President Bush for his service to our nation [applause pause], as
well as the generosity and cooperation he has shown throughout this
transition.

44 Americans have now taken the presidential oath.  Words have been spoken
during rising tides of prosperity, and the still waters of peace.  Yet every
so often the oath is taken amidst gathering clouds, and raging storms.

At these moments, America has carried on, not simply because of the vision or
skill of those in high office, but because we, the people, have remained
faithful to the ideals of our forebears, and true to our founding documents.
So it has been, so it must be with THIS        generation of Americans.

That we are in the midst of crisis is now well understood.

Our nation is at war with a far reaching network of violence and hatred.

Our economy is badly weakened, a consequence of greed and irresponsibility on
the part of some, but also our collective failure to make hard choices, and
prepare the nation for a new age.  Homes have been lost, jobs shed,
businesses shuttered/shattered???, our health care is too costly, our schools
fail too many, and each day brings brings new evidence that the way we use
energy strengthens our adversaries and threatens our planet.

These are the indicators of crisis, subject to data and statistics.
Less measurable, but no less profound is the sapping of confidence across our
land, a nagging fear that America's decline is inevitable, that the next
generation must lower its sights.

Today I say to you that the challenges we face are real.  They are serious
and they are many.  They will not be met easily or in a short span of time,
but know this America, THEY WILL BE MET!  [applause pause]

On this day, we gather because we have chosen hope over fear, unity of
purpose over conflict and discord.  On this day, we come to proclaim an end
to the petty grievances and false promises, the recriminations, and worn out
dogmas that for far too long have strangles our politics.

We remain a young nation, but in the words of scripture, the time has come to
set aside childish things.

The time has come to reaffirm our enduring spirit, to choose our better
history, to carry forward that precious gift, that noble idea, passed on from
generation to generation, the God given promise that ALL are equal, ALL are
free, and ALL deserve a chance to pursue their full measure of happiness.

[longer pause for applause]

In reaffirming the greatness of our nation, we understand that greatness is
never a given.

It must be earned.

Our journey has never been one of shortcuts or settling for less.

It has not been the path for the faint hearted, for those who prefer leisure
over work, or seek only the pleasures of riches and fame, rather it has been
the risk takers, the doers, the makers of things, some celebrated, but more
often men and women obscure in their labor, who have carried us up the long
rugged path towards prosperity and freedom.

For us, they packed up their few worldly possessions and travelled across
oceans in search of a new life.

For us, they toiled in sweatshops, and settled the West, endured the lash of
the whip, and plowed the hard earth.

For us, they fought, and died, in places like Concord, and Gettysburg,
Normandy, and Khe Sahn.

Time and again, these men and women struggled and sacrificed until their
hands were raw, so that we might live a better life.

They saw America as bigger than the sum of our individual ambitions, greater
than all the differences of birth, or wealth, or faction.

THIS is the journey we continue today.

We remain the most prosperous powerful nation on Earth.

Our workers are no less productive than when this crisis began.

Our minds are no less inventive.

Our goods and services no less needed than they were last week, or last
month, or last year.

Our capacity remains undiminished, but our time of standing pat, of
protecting narrow interests and putting off unpleasant decisions. . .that
time has surely passed.

Starting TODAY, we must pick ourselves up, dust ourselves off, and begin
again the work of remaking America. . .

[long applause pause]


. . .for everywhere we look there is work to be done.

The state of our economy calls for action, bold and swift, and we will act,
not only to create new jobs, but to lay new foundations for growth.  We will
build the roads and bridges, the electric grids and digital lines that feed
our commerce and bind us together.

We will restore science to its rightful place, and wield technology's wonders
to raise health care's quality and lower its cost.

We will harness the sun and the winds and the soil to fuel our cars and run
our factories, and we will transform our schools and colleges and
universities to meet the demands of a new age.

All this we can do.

All this we WILL do.

Now, there are some who question the scale of our ambitions, who suggest that
our system cannot tolerate too many big plans.

Their memories are short, for they have forgotten what this country has
already done, what free men and women can achieve when imagination is joined
to common purpose, and necessity to courage.

What the cynics fail to understand, is that the ground has shifted beneath
them, that the stale political arguments that have consumed us for so long no
longer apply.

The question we ask to day is not whether our government is too big or too
small, but whether it works, whether it helps families find jobs at a decent
wage, care they can afford, a retirement that is dignified.  Where the answer
is YES, we intend to move forward, where the answer is NO, programs will end,
and those of us who manage the public's dollars will be held to account, to
spend wisely, reform bad habits, and do our business in the light of day,
because only then can we restore the vital trust between a people and their
government.

Nor is the question before us whether the market is a force for good or ill.

Its power to generate wealth and expand freedom is unmatched, but this crisis
has reminded us that without a watchful eye, the market can spin out of
control, the nation cannot prosper long when it favors only the prosperous.

The success of our economy has always depended, not just on the size of our
gross domestic product, but on the reach of our prosperity, on our ability to
extend opportunity to every willing heart, not out of charity, but because it
is the surest route to our common good.

[long applause pause]

As for our common defense, we reject as false the choice between our safety
and our ideals.

Our founding fathers [pause for applause]. . . .

Our founding fathers, faced with perils we can scarcely imagine, drafted a
charter to assure the rule of law and the rights of man, a charter expanded
by the blood of generations.  Those ideals still light the world, and we will
not give them up for expedients' sake. . .

[applause pause]

. . .and so, to all the other peoples and governments who are watching today,
from the grandest capitols, to the small village where my father was born,
know that America is a friend of each nation, and every man, woman, and
child, who seeks a future of peace and dignity, and we are ready to lead once
more.

[long pause for applause]

Recall that earlier generations faced down fascism and communism, not just
with missiles and tanks, but with the sturdy alliances and enduring
convictions.

They understood that our power alone cannot protect us, nor does it entitle
us to do as we please.  Instead, they knew that our power grows through its
prudent use, our security emanates from the justness of our cause, the force
of our example, the tempering qualities of humility and restraint.

We are the keepers of this legacy.

Guided by these principles once more, we can meet those new threats that
demand even greater effort, even greater cooperation and understanding
between nations.

We will begin to responsibly leave Iraq to is people, and forge a hard earned
peace in Afghanistan.

With old friends and former foes we will work tirelessly to lessen the
nuclear threat, and roll back the specter of a warming planet.

We will not apologize for our way of life, nor will we waver in its defense,
and for those who seek to advance their aims by inducing terror and
slaughtering innocents, we say to you now, that our spirit is stronger,
and cannot be broken.

You cannot outlast us, and we will defeat you!

[long pause for applause]

For we know that our patchwork heritage is a strength, not a weakness.

We are a nation of Christians and Muslims, Jews and Hindus, and
non-believers.  We are shaped by every language and culture, drawn from every
end of this Earth, and because we have tasted the bitter swill of civil war
and segregation, and emerged from that dark chapter stronger, and more
united, we cannot help but believe that the old hatreds shall someday pass,
that the lines of tribe shall soon dissolve, that as the world grows smaller,
our common humanity shall reveal itself, and that America must play its role
in ushering in a new era of peace.

To the Muslim world, we seek a new way forward, based on mutual interest and
mutual respect.

To those leaders around the globe who seek to sow conflict, or blame their
societies' ills on the West, know that your people will judge you on what you
can build, not what you destroy.

[pause for applause]

To those who cling to power through corruption and deceit, and the silencing
of dissent, know that you are on the wrong side of history, but that we will
extend a hand if you are willing to unclench your fist.

[pause for applause]

To the people of poor nations, we pledge to work alongside you to make your
farms flourish and let clean waters flow, to nourish starved bodies, and feed
hungry minds, and to those nations like ours that enjoy relative plenty, we
say we can no longer afford indifference to the suffering outside our
borders, nor can we consume the world's resources without regard to effect.

For the world has changed, and we much change with it.

As we consider the road that unfolds before us, we remember with humble
gratitude those brave Americans who, at this very hour, patrol far off
deserts and distant mountains.  They have something to tell us, just as the
fallen heroes who lie in Arlington whisper through the ages.  We honor them,
not only because they are the guardians of our liberty, but because they
embody the spirit of service, a willingness to find meaning in something
greater than themselves.

And yet, at this moment, a moment that will define a generation, it is
precisely this spirit that must inhabit us ALL.

For as a government can do, and must do, it us ultimately the faith and
determination of the American people upon which this nation relies.  It is
the kindness to take in a stranger when the levees break, the selflessness of
workers who would rather cut their hours than see a friend lose their job,
which sees us through our darkest hours.  It is the firefighters' courage to
storm a stairway filled with smoke, but also a parent's willingness to
nurture a child, that finally decides our fate.

Our challenges may be new, the instruments with which we meet them may be
new, but those values upon which our success depends, honesty, and hard work,
courage and fair play, tolerance and curiosity, loyalty and patriotism, these
things are old, these things are true.  They have been the quiet force of
progress throughout our history.

What is demanded then, is a return to these truths.

What is required of us now, is a new era of responsibility, a recognition on
the part of every American, that we have duties to ourselves, our nation, and
the world, duties that we do not grudgingly accept, but rather seize gladly,
firm in the knowledge that there is nothing so satisfying to the spirit, so
defining of our character, than giving our all to a difficult task.

This is the price and the promise of citizenship.

This is the source of our confidence, the knowledge that God calls on us to
shape an uncertain destiny.

This is the meaning of our liberty and our creed, why men and women and
children of every race and every faith can join in celebration across this
magnificent mall, and why a man whose father, less than 60 years ago, might
not have been served at a local restaurant can now stand before you to take a
most sacred oath.

[long pause for applause]

So let us mark this day with remembrance, of who we are, and how far we have
traveled.  In the year of America's birth, in the coldest of months, a small
band of patriots huddled by dying campfires on the shores of an icy river.

The capitol was abandoned, the enemy was advancing, the snow was stained with
blood.  At a moment when the outcome of our revolution was most in doubt, the
father of our nation ordered these words be read to the people:

"Let it be told to the future world, that in the depth of winter, when
nothing but hope and virtue could survive, that the city and the country,
alarmed at one common danger, came forth to meet it."

America, in the face of our common dangers, in this winter of our hardship,
let us remember these timeless words.  With hope and virtue, let us brave
once more the icy currents, and endure what storms may come.  Let it be said
by our children's children, that when we were tested, we refused to let this
journey end, that we did not turn back, nor did we falter, and with eyes
fixed on the horizon and God's grace upon us, we carried forth that great
gift of freedom and delivered it safely to future generations.

Thank you, God bless you, and God bless the United States of America.



Version 2: As transcribed by a major news organization

PRESIDENT BARACK Thank you. Thank you.

CROWD: Obama! Obama! Obama! Obama!

My fellow citizens: I stand here today humbled by the task before us,
grateful for the trust you have bestowed, mindful of the sacrifices
borne by our ancestors.

I thank President Bush for his service to our nation...

(APPLAUSE)

... as well as the generosity and cooperation he has shown throughout
this transition.

Forty-four Americans have now taken the presidential oath.

The words have been spoken during rising tides of prosperity and the
still waters of peace. Yet, every so often the oath is taken amidst
gathering clouds and raging storms. At these moments, America has
carried on not simply because of the skill or vision of those in high
office, but because We the People have remained faithful to the ideals
of our forbearers, and true to our founding documents.

So it has been. So it must be with this generation of Americans.

That we are in the midst of crisis is now well understood. Our nation is
at war against a far-reaching network of violence and hatred. Our
economy is badly weakened, a consequence of greed and irresponsibility
on the part of some but also our collective failure to make hard choices
and prepare the nation for a new age.

Homes have been lost, jobs shed, businesses shuttered. Our health care
is too costly, our schools fail too many, and each day brings further
evidence that the ways we use energy strengthen our adversaries and
threaten our planet.

These are the indicators of crisis, subject to data and statistics. Less
measurable, but no less profound, is a sapping of confidence across our
land; a nagging fear that America's decline is inevitable, that the next
generation must lower its sights.

Today I say to you that the challenges we face are real, they are
serious and they are many. They will not be met easily or in a short
span of time. But know this America: They will be met.

(APPLAUSE)

On this day, we gather because we have chosen hope over fear, unity of
purpose over conflict and discord.

On this day, we come to proclaim an end to the petty grievances and
false promises, the recriminations and worn-out dogmas that for far too
long have strangled our politics.

We remain a young nation, but in the words of Scripture, the time has
come to set aside childish things. The time has come to reaffirm our
enduring spirit; to choose our better history; to carry forward that
precious gift, that noble idea, passed on from generation to generation:
the God-given promise that all are equal, all are free, and all deserve
a chance to pursue their full measure of happiness.

(APPLAUSE)

In reaffirming the greatness of our nation, we understand that greatness
is never a given. It must be earned. Our journey has never been one of
shortcuts or settling for less.

It has not been the path for the faint-hearted, for those who prefer
leisure over work, or seek only the pleasures of riches and fame.

Rather, it has been the risk-takers, the doers, the makers of things --
some celebrated, but more often men and women obscure in their labor --
who have carried us up the long, rugged path towards prosperity and
freedom.

For us, they packed up their few worldly possessions and traveled across
oceans in search of a new life. For us, they toiled in sweatshops and
settled the West, endured the lash of the whip and plowed the hard
earth.

For us, they fought and died in places Concord and Gettysburg; Normandy
and Khe Sahn.

Time and again these men and women struggled and sacrificed and worked
till their hands were raw so that we might live a better life. They saw
America as bigger than the sum of our individual ambitions; greater than
all the differences of birth or wealth or faction.

This is the journey we continue today. We remain the most prosperous,
powerful nation on Earth. Our workers are no less productive than when
this crisis began. Our minds are no less inventive, our goods and
services no less needed than they were last week or last month or last
year. Our capacity remains undiminished. But our time of standing pat,
of protecting narrow interests and putting off unpleasant decisions --
that time has surely passed.

Starting today, we must pick ourselves up, dust ourselves off, and begin
again the work of remaking America.

(APPLAUSE)

For everywhere we look, there is work to be done.

The state of our economy calls for action: bold and swift. And we will
act not only to create new jobs but to lay a new foundation for growth.

We will build the roads and bridges, the electric grids and digital
lines that feed our commerce and bind us together.

We will restore science to its rightful place and wield technology's
wonders to raise health care's quality...

(APPLAUSE)

... and lower its costs.

We will harness the sun and the winds and the soil to fuel our cars and
run our factories. And we will transform our schools and colleges and
universities to meet the demands of a new age.

All this we can do. All this we will do.

Now, there are some who question the scale of our ambitions, who suggest
that our system cannot tolerate too many big plans. Their memories are
short, for they have forgotten what this country has already done, what
free men and women can achieve when imagination is joined to common
purpose and necessity to courage.

What the cynics fail to understand is that the ground has shifted
beneath them, that the stale political arguments that have consumed us
for so long, no longer apply.

MR. The question we ask today is not whether our government is too big
or too small, but whether it works, whether it helps families find jobs
at a decent wage, care they can afford, a retirement that is dignified.

Where the answer is yes, we intend to move forward. Where the answer is
no, programs will end.

And those of us who manage the public's knowledge will be held to
account, to spend wisely, reform bad habits, and do our business in the
light of day, because only then can we restore the vital trust between a
people and their government.

Nor is the question before us whether the market is a force for good or
ill. Its power to generate wealth and expand freedom is unmatched.

But this crisis has reminded us that without a watchful eye, the market
can spin out of control. The nation cannot prosper long when it favors
only the prosperous.

The success of our economy has always depended not just on the size of
our gross domestic product, but on the reach of our prosperity; on the
ability to extend opportunity to every willing heart -- not out of
charity, but because it is the surest route to our common good.

(APPLAUSE)

As for our common defense, we reject as false the choice between our
safety and our ideals.

Our founding fathers faced with perils that we can scarcely imagine,
drafted a charter to assure the rule of law and the rights of man, a
charter expanded by the blood of generations.

Those ideals still light the world, and we will not give them up for
expedience's sake.

And so, to all other peoples and governments who are watching today,
from the grandest capitals to the small village where my father was
born: know that America is a friend of each nation and every man, woman
and child who seeks a future of peace and dignity, and we are ready to
lead once more.

(APPLAUSE)

Recall that earlier generations faced down fascism and communism not
just with missiles and tanks, but with the sturdy alliances and enduring
convictions.

They understood that our power alone cannot protect us, nor does it
entitle us to do as we please. Instead, they knew that our power grows
through its prudent use. Our security emanates from the justness of our
cause; the force of our example; the tempering qualities of humility and
restraint.

We are the keepers of this legacy, guided by these principles once more,
we can meet those new threats that demand even greater effort, even
greater cooperation and understanding between nations. We'll begin to
responsibly leave Iraq to its people and forge a hard- earned peace in
Afghanistan.

With old friends and former foes, we'll work tirelessly to lessen the
nuclear threat and roll back the specter of a warming planet.

We will not apologize for our way of life nor will we waver in its
defense.

And for those who seek to advance their aims by inducing terror and
slaughtering innocents, we say to you now that, "Our spirit is stronger
and cannot be broken. You cannot outlast us, and we will defeat you."

(APPLAUSE)

For we know that our patchwork heritage is a strength, not a weakness.

We are a nation of Christians and Muslims, Jews and Hindus, and
nonbelievers. We are shaped by every language and culture, drawn from
every end of this Earth.

And because we have tasted the bitter swill of civil war and segregation
and emerged from that dark chapter stronger and more united, we cannot
help but believe that the old hatreds shall someday pass; that the lines
of tribe shall soon dissolve; that as the world grows smaller, our
common humanity shall reveal itself; and that America must play its role
in ushering in a new era of peace.

To the Muslim world, we seek a new way forward, based on mutual interest
and mutual respect.

To those leaders around the globe who seek to sow conflict or blame
their society's ills on the West, know that your people will judge you
on what you can build, not what you destroy.

To those...

(APPLAUSE)

To those who cling to power through corruption and deceit and the
silencing of dissent, know that you are on the wrong side of history,
but that we will extend a hand if you are willing to unclench your fist.

(APPLAUSE)

To the people of poor nations, we pledge to work alongside you to make
your farms flourish and let clean waters flow; to nourish starved bodies
and feed hungry minds.

And to those nations like ours that enjoy relative plenty, we say we can
no longer afford indifference to the suffering outside our borders, nor
can we consume the world's resources without regard to effect. For the
world has changed, and we must change with it.

As we consider the road that unfolds before us, we remember with humble
gratitude those brave Americans who, at this very hour, patrol far-off
deserts and distant mountains. They have something to tell us, just as
the fallen heroes who lie in Arlington whisper through the ages.

We honor them not only because they are guardians of our liberty, but
because they embody the spirit of service: a willingness to find meaning
in something greater than themselves.

And yet, at this moment, a moment that will define a generation, it is
precisely this spirit that must inhabit us all.

For as much as government can do and must do, it is ultimately the faith
and determination of the American people upon which this nation relies.

It is the kindness to take in a stranger when the levees break; the
selflessness of workers who would rather cut their hours than see a
friend lose their job which sees us through our darkest hours.

It is the firefighter's courage to storm a stairway filled with smoke,
but also a parent's willingness to nurture a child, that finally decides
our fate.

Our challenges may be new, the instruments with which we meet them may
be new, but those values upon which our success depends, honesty and
hard work, courage and fair play, tolerance and curiosity, loyalty and
patriotism -- these things are old.

These things are true. They have been the quiet force of progress
throughout our history.

What is demanded then is a return to these truths. What is required of
us now is a new era of responsibility -- a recognition, on the part of
every American, that we have duties to ourselves, our nation and the
world, duties that we do not grudgingly accept but rather seize gladly,
firm in the knowledge that there is nothing so satisfying to the spirit,
so defining of our character than giving our all to a difficult task.

This is the price and the promise of citizenship.

This is the source of our confidence: the knowledge that God calls on us
to shape an uncertain destiny.

This is the meaning of our liberty and our creed, why men and women and
children of every race and every faith can join in celebration across
this magnificent mall. And why a man whose father less than 60 years ago
might not have been served at a local restaurant can now stand before
you to take a most sacred oath.

(APPLAUSE)

So let us mark this day in remembrance of who we are and how far we have
traveled.

In the year of America's birth, in the coldest of months, a small band
of patriots huddled by nine campfires on the shores of an icy river.

The capital was abandoned. The enemy was advancing. The snow was stained
with blood.

At a moment when the outcome of our revolution was most in doubt, the
father of our nation ordered these words be read to the people:

"Let it be told to the future world that in the depth of winter, when
nothing but hope and virtue could survive, that the city and the
country, alarmed at one common danger, came forth to meet it."

America, in the face of our common dangers, in this winter of our
hardship, let us remember these timeless words; with hope and virtue,
let us brave once more the icy currents, and endure what storms may
come; let it be said by our children's children that when we were tested
we refused to let this journey end, that we did not turn back nor did we
falter; and with eyes fixed on the horizon and God's grace upon us, we
carried forth that great gift of freedom and delivered it safely to
future generations.

Thank you. God bless you.

(APPLAUSE)

And God bless the United States of America.

(APPLAUSE)



Version 3: As transcribed by an individual Project Gutenberg volunteer

Presidential Inaugural Address
of Barack Obama
on January 20, 2009.

by Barack Obama


My fellow citizens:

I stand here today humbled by the task before us,
grateful for the trust you have bestowed,
mindful of the sacrifices borne by our ancestors.
I thank President Bush for his service to our nation,
as well as the generosity and cooperation he has
shown throughout this transition.

Forty-four Americans have now taken the presidential oath.
The words have been spoken during rising tides of prosperity
and the still waters of peace. Yet, every so often the oath is taken
amidst gathering clouds and raging storms. At these moments,
America has carried on not simply because of the skill or vision
of those in high office, but because we the people have remained
faithful to the ideals of our forebears, and true to our founding documents.

So it has been. So it must be with this generation of Americans.

That we are in the midst of crisis is now well understood.
Our nation is at war,
against a far-reaching network of violence and hatred.
Our economy is badly weakened, a consequence of
greed and irresponsibility on the part of some,
but also our collective failure to make hard choices
and prepare the nation for a new age.
Homes have been lost; jobs shed; businesses shuttered.
Our health care is too costly; our schools fail too many; and
each day brings further evidence that the ways we use energy
strengthen our adversaries and threaten our planet.

These are the indicators of crisis, subject to data and statistics.
Less measurable but no less profound is a sapping of confidence
across our land -- a nagging fear that America's decline is inevitable,
and that the next generation must lower its sights.

Today I say to you that the challenges we face are real.
They are serious and they are many.
They will not be met easily or in a short span of time.
But know this, America -- they will be met.

On this day, we gather because we have chosen
hope over fear,
unity of purpose over conflict and discord.

On this day, we come to proclaim an end to the petty grievances
and false promises, the recriminations and worn out dogmas,
that for far too long have strangled our politics.

We remain a young nation, but in the words of scripture,
the time has come to set aside childish things.
The time has come to reaffirm our enduring spirit;
to choose our better history; to carry forward that precious gift,
that noble idea, passed on from generation to generation:
the God-given promise that all are equal, all are free and
all deserve a chance to pursue their full measure of happiness.

In reaffirming the greatness of our nation,
we understand that greatness is never a given. It must be earned.
Our journey has never been one of shortcuts or settling for less.
It has not been the path for the faint-hearted --
for those who prefer leisure over work,
or seek only the pleasures of riches and fame.
Rather, it has been the risk-takers, the doers, the makers of things --
some celebrated but more often men and women obscure in their labor,
who have carried us up the long, rugged path towards prosperity and freedom.

For us, they packed up their few worldly possessions
and traveled across oceans in search of a new life.

For us, they toiled in sweatshops and settled the West;
endured the lash of the whip and plowed the hard earth.

For us, they fought and died, in places like
Concord and Gettysburg; Normandy and Khe Sanh.

Time and again these men and women struggled and sacrificed and
worked till their hands were raw so that we might live a better life.
They saw America as bigger than the sum of our individual ambitions;
greater than all the differences of birth or wealth or faction.

This is the journey we continue today.
We remain the most prosperous, powerful nation on Earth.
Our workers are no less productive than when this crisis began.
Our minds are no less inventive, our goods and services no less needed
than they were last week or last month or last year.
Our capacity remains undiminished.
But our time of standing pat, of protecting narrow interests and
putting off unpleasant decisions -- that time has surely passed.
Starting today, we must pick ourselves up, dust ourselves off,
and begin again the work of remaking America.

For everywhere we look, there is work to be done.
The state of the economy calls for action, bold and swift,
and we will act -- not only to create new jobs,
but to lay a new foundation for growth.
We will build the roads and bridges, the electric grids and digital lines
that feed our commerce and bind us together.
We will restore science to its rightful place, and wield technology's wonders
to raise health care's quality and lower its cost.
We will harness the sun and the winds and the soil
to fuel our cars and run our factories.
And we will transform our schools and colleges and universities
to meet the demands of a new age.
All this we can do.
And all this we will do.

Now, there are some who question the scale of our ambitions --
who suggest that our system cannot tolerate too many big plans.
Their memories are short.
For they have forgotten what this country has already done;
what free men and women can achieve
when imagination is joined to common purpose, and necessity to courage.

What the cynics fail to understand is that
the ground has shifted beneath them --
that the stale political arguments that
have consumed us for so long no longer apply.
The question we ask today is
not whether our government is too big or too small,
but whether it works -- whether it helps families find
jobs at a decent wage, care they can afford, a retirement that is dignified.
Where the answer is yes, we intend to move forward.
Where the answer is no, programs will end.
And those of us who manage the public's dollars will be held to account --
to spend wisely, reform bad habits, and do our business in the light of day --
because only then can we restore the vital trust
between a people and their government.

Nor is the question before us whether the market is a force for good or ill.
Its power to generate wealth and expand freedom is unmatched,
but this crisis has reminded us that without a watchful eye,
the market can spin out of control --
and that a nation cannot prosper long when it favors only the prosperous.
The success of our economy has always depended
not just on the size of our gross domestic product,
but on the reach of our prosperity;
on our ability to extend opportunity to every willing heart --
not out of charity, but because it is the surest route to our common good.

As for our common defense,
we reject as false the choice between our safety and our ideals.
Our founding fathers, faced with perils we can scarcely imagine,
drafted a charter to assure the rule of law and the rights of man,
a charter expanded by the blood of generations.
Those ideals still light the world,
and we will not give them up for expedience's sake.
And so to all the other peoples and governments who are watching today,
from the grandest capitals to the small village where my father was born:
know that America is a friend of each nation and
every man, woman, and child who seeks a future of peace and dignity,
and that we are
ready to lead once more.

Recall that earlier generations faced down fascism and communism
not just with missiles and tanks, but
with sturdy alliances and enduring convictions.
They understood that our power alone cannot protect us,
nor does it entitle us to do as we please.
Instead, they knew that our power grows through its prudent use;
our security emanates from the justness of our cause,
the force of our example, the tempering qualities of humility and restraint.

We are the keepers of this legacy. Guided by these principles once more,
we can meet those new threats that demand even greater effort --
even greater cooperation and understanding between nations.
We will begin to responsibly leave Iraq to its people,
and forge a hard-earned peace in Afghanistan.
With old friends and former foes,
we will work tirelessly to lessen the nuclear threat,
and roll back the specter of a warming planet.
We will not apologize for our way of life, nor will we waver in its defense,
and for those who seek to advance their aims
by inducing terror and slaughtering innocents,
we say to you now that our spirit is stronger and cannot be broken;
you cannot outlast us,
and we will defeat you.

For we know that our patchwork heritage is a strength, not a weakness.
We are a nation of Christians and Muslims, Jews and Hindus -- and non-believers.
We are shaped by every language and culture, drawn from every end of this Earth;
and because we have tasted the bitter swill of civil war and segregation,
and emerged from that dark chapter stronger and more united,
we cannot help but believe that the old hatreds shall someday pass;
that the lines of tribe shall soon dissolve;
that as the world grows smaller, our common humanity shall reveal itself;
and that America must play its role in ushering in a new era of peace.

To the Muslim world, we seek a new way forward,
based on mutual interest and mutual respect.
To those leaders around the globe who seek to sow conflict,
or blame their society's ills on the West -- know that
your people will judge you on what you can build, not what you destroy.
To those who cling to power through
corruption and deceit and the silencing of dissent,
know that you are on the wrong side of history; but that
we will extend a hand if you are willing to unclench your fist.

To the people of poor nations, we pledge to work alongside you
to make your farms flourish and let clean waters flow;
to nourish starved bodies and feed hungry minds.
And to those nations like ours that enjoy relative plenty,
we say we can no longer afford indifference to the suffering outside our borders;
nor can we consume the world's resources without regard to effect.
For the world has changed,
and we must change with it.

As we consider the road that unfolds before us,
we remember with humble gratitude those brave Americans who,
at this very hour, patrol far-off deserts and distant mountains.
They have something to tell us today,
just as the fallen heroes who lie in Arlington whisper through the ages.
We honor them not only because they are guardians of our liberty,
but because they embody the spirit of service;
a willingness to find meaning in something greater than themselves.
And yet, at this moment -- a moment that will define a generation --
it is precisely this spirit
that must inhabit us all.

For as much as government can do and must do,
it is ultimately the faith and determination of the American people
upon which this nation relies.
It is the kindness to take in a stranger when the levees break,
the selflessness of workers who would rather
cut their hours than see a friend lose their job
which sees us through our darkest hours.
It is the firefighter's courage to storm a stairway filled with smoke,
but also a parent's willingness to nurture a child,
that finally decides our fate.

Our challenges may be new.
The instruments with which we meet them may be new.
But those values upon which our success depends --
hard work and honesty, courage and fair play,
tolerance and curiosity, loyalty and patriotism --
these things are old. These things are true.
They have been the quiet force of progress throughout our history.
What is demanded then is a return to these truths.
What is required of us now is a new era of responsibility --
a recognition, on the part of every American, that
we have duties to ourselves, our nation, and the world,
duties that we do not grudgingly accept but rather seize gladly,
firm in the knowledge that there is nothing so satisfying to the spirit,
so defining of our character,
than giving our all to a difficult task.

This is the price and the promise of citizenship.

This is the source of our confidence --
the knowledge that God calls on us to shape an uncertain destiny.

This is the meaning of our liberty and our creed --
why men and women and children of every race and every faith
can join in celebration across this magnificent Mall,
and why a man whose father less than sixty years ago
might not have been served at a local restaurant can
now stand before you to take a most sacred oath.

So let us mark this day with remembrance,
of who we are and how far we have traveled.
In the year of America's birth, in the coldest of months,
a small band of patriots huddled by
dying campfires on the shores of an icy river.
The capital was abandoned. The enemy was advancing.
The snow was stained with blood.
At a moment when the outcome of our revolution was most in doubt,
the father of our nation ordered these words be read to the people:

"Let it be told to the future world... that in the depth of winter,
when nothing but hope and virtue could survive...
that the city and the country, alarmed at one common danger,
came forth to meet (it)."

America, in the face of our common dangers, in this winter of our hardship,
let us remember these timeless words. With hope and virtue,
let us brave once more the icy currents, and endure what storms may come.
Let it be said by our children's children that when we were tested
we refused to let this journey end, that we did not turn back nor did we falter;
and with eyes fixed on the horizon and God's grace upon us,
we carried forth that great gift of freedom
and delivered it safely to future generations.


Thank you. God bless you. And God bless the United States of America.


***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK INAUGURAL PRESIDENTIAL ADDRESS***


******* This file should be named 28000-8.txt or 28000-8.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/8/0/0/28000



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
